# Outline

1. **Defining the problem space**
2. **Analysing existing solutions**
3. **Design Proposal**
4. **Effectiveness**

## Urgency

### The internet is a tool

- Direct use of machinery has always caused injury
- Our love affair with new things has been to strong to put them aside
- Cutting edge innovation has always evoked fearful reaction
- We are living in times of change the world has never seen before
- Our brains have slowly evolved over 2000 years, having to negotiate with immense change the last 200 years
- New technology is unlikely to explain itself

### Mental Health effects of internet use

- Mental health amongst adults has stayed stable, risen 40% in youth since 2004
- Third of population will experience anxiety
- root cause of stress: being always on, never done
- Integrators vs segmentors
- moderate use is not (page 68) associated with mental problems, is even advantageous for mental health
- more useful to look at WHAT person is doing, not how long/which device, f.e. conducting social life in same space as celebreties can lead to status anxiety
- studies have found links to depression, anxiety, social distancing, eating disorders, compulsive disorders, gambing dependency and suicide linked to habit forming products
- hooked: habit forming method that can be hugely beneficial: Excercise, healthy eating, anger management, abstention from drugs. Can also be used to induce non-healthy goals
- eye strain, vocal loss, muscoskeletal damage, hearing impact, bowel problems, uneasiness
- blue light reduces melatonin. makes it harder to sleep
- digital comfort: people have gravitated towards groups in which they feel known, seen and supported
- disruptive to natural sleep cycles- sleep is one of best things anyone can do to care for health - tech can disrupt it
- Technology connected to depression, dysregulated mood, aggression, fatigue, difficulty concentrating
- Our social live exist in place we cannot relax

### Regulation of the internet

- Algorithms designed to keep us engaged filter world
- Physically demanding workplaces in Europe, USA and much of asia are now heavily regulated
- Mental health enjoys few legal protections. No impetus from state or mandatory risk assessment for insurance cover when estimating mental health implications of new tech
- those who rely on social media to find their news tend to be more plarized than others
- digital tribes
- Technology seeks to preserve social structures that allow for its existance, rather than benefiting users
- Aritifical intelligence is increasingly used to make decisions about welfare of individuals, yet are controlled by tiny elite
Problems with existing solutions
- Academic rather than industrial pursuit
- screen time is problematic— what is child doing when looking at screen? are they playing a game? what kind of game? reading a book? looking at ads?
- more useful to look at WHAT person is doing, not how long/which device, f.e. conducting social life in same space as celebreties can lead to status anxiety
- traditional blocking software is bad of efficiently seperating the above - even with ml.
- many of dangers to our health caused by digital tech could be avoided if there was greater awareness, but companies are reluctant to acknowledge dangers for fear of losing users
- flawed business plan
- digital detox-complete abstinence too brute force, not viable for many, decreasingly viable as life becomes degitized
- Change need not to be in nature of technology, only in its transparency
- The human brain is bad at perceiving slow change
- need for transparent / honest design (making invisible processes visible)
- how do we make sure that we collect and process data without infringing on peoples privacy concerns and that the data is not used for purposes beyond its original intention?

[Screen time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screen_time)

## Improvement

**Shape, form, interaction, quality of insight, cultural references, aesthetics, how attention-seeking it is**

- ambinet interfaces
- intelligent user interfaces

### Using Machine Learning to understand human behavior

- Machine learning is effective at exposing (behavioral) patterns
- opposed to logical based processes
- software that can adapt its behavior automatically to better match requirements of their task
- we do not write programs but collect data
- large dataset needed: transfer-learning
- anti-recommendation system (people that buby also buy y)
- algorithm needs to be able to generalize
- how do we make sure that we collect and process data without infringing on peoples privacy concerns and that the data is not used for purposes beyond its original intention?
- who gets to label information? can data be labeled objectively?
- using my own data for training pruposes
- problem: labeling toxicity [https://www.wired.com/story/drag-queens-vs-far-right-toxic-tweets/](https://www.wired.com/story/drag-queens-vs-far-right-toxic-tweets/)

### Art & Design

- How historical interfaces dealt with this, if they did at all
- established use patterns for interaction with light and color
- finding new solutions by puting into context of specultive design (page 8 chapter 1). ex. inspiration by nature, specifically plants
- Art: Olafur Eliasson, James Turrell, little sun
- Why this form?
- how can form and interaction be defined through existing furniture?
- Black screens vs. non-intervenant nudges
- live wire by natalie jeremijenko
- transforming virtual into physical
- movie "inside out"

### Psychology

- lack of term that encapsulates mental health in the digital: digital health not appropreate
- hooked: habit forming method that can be hugely beneficial: Excercise, healthy eating, anger management, abstention from drugs. Can also be used to induce non-healthy goals
- traffic light system: green, yellow, red
COLOR-PSYCHOLOGY informs design decisions
- About 8 percent of men and 0.5 of women have color blindness
- Most common: distinguish between red and green (deuteranopia and protanopia); green and blue (tritanopia)
- much more common that people assume
- disciminating between different colors and creating categories is culturally dependent.
- alarm color: stop signs in usa used to be yellow before 1954
- color preferences can be found in different age groups & cultures
- Goethe and schiller coupled colors to cgaracter trauts: red for beatiful, yelllow for good, green for usefulblue for common. Gestalt psychology in warly 1900s also attributed universal emotions to colors, a theory which was taught to students at bauhaus. first color psychology test by max lüscher in 1940s, tested responses to series of colored cards. psychologis t could interpret persons character based on results. Disputed because it is not clear if people respond to colors or the cultural concept of color. More likely that upbinging and personal preference is key. Some tests have been proven to work.
- cooler colors have calming influence, hence hospitals and prison walls are often painted in blue
- black may be color of morning in some cultures, white in others.
- red, orange, yellow = danger, attention?
- Green = health, success?
- see p.75 -> for more color meanings & gender, to color or not to color
- Design solution that deals with cultural differences: let people chose themselves
- This also solves meaning associated to colors: people dont rely on manual or cultural context to understand color visualization

## Effectiveness

- sometimes same characteristics cause positive reaction i some users and lead to anxiety, depression and self-harm in others
- users become more aware and excercise degree of judgement
- you can be offline, you can be online, as long as you know where you are
- privacy concerns
- who is target audience? adults or children specifically?
- Of what importance is the speed of light/color changes?
- politics of color: does everybody perceive it the same way? does it need a color slider for individual settings?
- would other modes of interaction be more efficient than light?
- feasability of mass production?
- is it only a proof of concept?
- is it art or design?
- how accurate is the dataset?
- Cross device functionality. ubiquitous computing spreads our focus
- taking other digital media into account

---

### Defining the problem space

***effect of internet consumption on mental health***

- The internet is a **tool**
    - Direct use of machinery has always caused injury
    - Physically demanding workplaces in Europe, USA and much of asia are now heavily regulated
    - Internet is mostly unregulated
    - Why humans take long to recognise health impacts of new tools
    - Human evolution outpaced by computer evolution
- The internet is **unhealthy**
    - depression, anxiety, social distancing, eating disorders, compulsive disorders, gambing dependency and suicide linked to habit forming products, eye strain, vocal loss, muscoskeletal damage, hearing impact, bowel problems, uneasiness
    - blue light reduces melatonin
    - root cause of stress: being always on, never done
    - more useful to look at WHAT person is doing, not how long/which device, f.e. conducting social life in same space as celebreties can lead to status anxiety
    - Our social live exist in place we cannot relax
    - Academic rather than industrial pursuit
    - traditional blocking software is bad
    - *Change need not to be in nature of technology, only in its transparency*
    - How has it changed us (social behaviour, motoric skills, concentration, mental condition)?
- Why screen based devices are intrusive

### Analysing existing solutions

- **Screen–time** apps
    - Apple
    - Third party
    - *Other solutions…?*
- How do they work?
    - (Supposedly) private, stored on device
    - Access to entire device, not only browser
- What are their pitfalls?
    - Screen based, commit to screen time themselves
    - Intrude UX/require attention
    - Only give superficial insight: only tracks time, not content of internet exposure

### Design Proposal

- How they would improve on existing solutions
- Using **color** to convey meaning
    - human brain is bad at perceiving slow change, light would be suitable visualisation of sum of interactions
    - How does my design use color to its benefit?
    - What are the difficulties when using color
        - Cultural meaning
        - Color blindness
        - Blue light interferes with sleep
- **ML** as a means to better understand human behaviour
    - What is **Natural Language Processing**? **Sentiment Analysis**?
    - How does my work implement sentiment analysis?
    - As opposed to **logical based processes** (blocking filters), ML is effective at **exposing (behavioural) patterns**
        - software that can adapt its behavior automatically to better match requirements of their task
        - we do not write programs but collect data
    - How does it implement its **dataset**?
        - large dataset needed: transfer-learning
        - algorithm needs to be able to generalize
        - Where is the dataset from?
            - who gets to label information? can data be labeled objectively?
            - Problem: labeling toxicity
            - What does its dataset encapsulate? How accurate is it?
    - What are the **privacy concerns** of using ML?
        - how do I make sure that we collect and process data without infringing on peoples privacy concerns/data isn't being used for purposes beyond its original intention?
- Interface/**interaction** design considerations
    - Are there **historical interfaces** that dealt with the same problem space?
    - Can I finding new solutions by putting into context of **speculative design**
    - What are ambient interfaces?
    - Who can I design a non-intrusive interface?
    - how can existing furniture inform the design?
    - how would people interact with it?
    - **Art** references: transforming virtual into physical / creating emotion using color and light
        - **Live wire** by natalie jeremijenko
        - **Olafur Eliasson, James Turrell, little sun**
        - Movie: Inside out
    - which parts does it consits of? ui, object?
    - Why is it **appropriating** an **ikea** **lamp**?
- Budget considerations

### Effectiveness

- what works
- what doesnt work
- what could work better
- is it a viable product for market? Proof of concept?
- is it art or design?
- what does it inform? psychology?
- how could it be improved?

**How will I test the efficiency of my work?**

1. Establish a common dataset I can use as an objective measure. Will I make it myself? Will I scrape twitter? Are there databases for unhealthiness? What is unhealthy?
2. Establish testing context
3. Establish how test can not only be performed numerically, but holistically (cultural context determines toxicity). Think of drag queen problem.
4. Test tensorflow/ml5 sentiment model
5. Test google model
6. Plot graph
- Am I assuming that happy websites make us happy? That bad content makes us feel sad?
- What would I do differently would I have more technical expertise
- Would I have unlimited manpower, where would I go with this?
- Title: *Creating a smart lamp for digital wellbeing* comes with less overhead
- Test it on people, you might gain insights. How effective is it? Will people use it in different ways?
- Adress shortcomings. Be realistic. How is sentiment analysis limiting your project? What could other ML applications offer? Does it work?
- Creating an own testing dataset might not be efficient. Test it on real life applications instead.
- Cluster notes into conceptual topics. Nest.
- 3500 no upper limit.
- Send draft by next week
- How does this project inform the field of digital wellbeing? How is it informed by the field of digital wellbeing?